# Boot Story – ASUS Vivobook S16 (Ubuntu 24.04 LTS)

## Machine Information

- Hardware: ASUS Vivobook S16
- Operating System: Ubuntu 24.04 LTS
- Architecture: x86_64

---

## 1. Firmware and Bootloader

This machine boots using UEFI firmware.

The bootloader installed by Ubuntu is GRUB2.


---

## 2. Kernel Information

Kernel version:

```text
6.17.0-29-generic
```

First five lines of dmesg:

```text
[    0.000000] Linux version 6.17.0-29-generic (buildd@lcy02-amd64-065)
[    0.000000] Command line: BOOT_IMAGE=/boot/vmlinuz-6.17.0-29-generic
[    0.000000] KERNEL supported cpus:
[    0.000000]   Intel GenuineIntel
[    0.000000] BIOS-provided physical RAM map:
```

Obtained using:

```bash
dmesg | head -5
```

---

## 3. systemd Boot Process

Default target:

```text
graphical.target
```

Obtained using:

```bash
systemctl get-default
```

Three services that started during boot:

### 1. NetworkManager.service

Responsible for configuring wired and wireless network connections.

### 2. systemd-logind.service

Handles user logins, sessions and seat management.

### 3. bluetooth.service

Provides Bluetooth device management and pairing support.

Obtained using:

```bash
systemctl list-units --type=service
```

---

## 4. Examples of Linux File Types

### Regular File (-)

```text
-rw-r--r-- 1 ido ido 220 Apr 23 09:10 ~/.bash_logout
```

### Directory (d)

```text
drwxr-xr-x 23 root root 4096 Jun 10 15:42 /etc
```

### Symbolic Link (l)

```text
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 7 Apr 22 12:10 /bin -> usr/bin
```

### Character Device (c)

```text
crw-rw-rw- 1 root root 1, 3 Jun 10 15:42 /dev/null
```

### Block Device (b)

```text
brw-rw---- 1 root disk 8, 0 Jun 10 15:42 /dev/sda
```

### Named Pipe (p)

```text
prw-r--r-- 1 ido ido 0 Jun 10 16:15 /tmp/myfifo
```

Created using:

```bash
mkfifo /tmp/myfifo
```

### Socket (s)

```text
srw-rw-rw- 1 root root 0 Jun 10 15:42 /run/systemd/journal/stdout
```

---

## 5. FHS Directory Exploration

### /etc

The `/etc` directory contains system-wide configuration files.

Observations:
- Contains configuration for networking, users, services and package management.
- The most interesting file was `/etc/fstab`, which defines filesystems mounted during boot.

---

### /var

The `/var` directory contains variable data generated by the system.

Observations:
- Contains logs, caches and package manager information.
- The most interesting directory was `/var/log`, where boot and service logs are stored.

---

### /usr

The `/usr` directory contains most user-space programs and libraries.

Observations:
- Contains executables, shared libraries and documentation.
- The most interesting directory was `/usr/bin`, which contains hundreds of installed commands.

---

